the Hamas run Health Ministry in Gaza
says at least 70 people have been killed
by Israeli shelling and air strikes in
eastern areas of Han Yunis Medics say
more than 200 people have been injured
in the Israeli strikes and that
hospitals in the area are overwhelmed by
casualties meanwhile the World Health
Organization says the number of people
needing to be evacuated from Gaza for
medical care has risen to around
14,000 and that it is extremely worried
about the possibility of a polio break
thousands of Palestinians have fled
harun including many who were in an area
previously designated as a humanitarian
Zone the Israeli Army says the
evacuation order is in response to
Rocket fire separately a meeting between
Israel's prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and US President Joe Biden
which was due to take place in
Washington later today has been delayed
until Thursday I spoke to our
correspondent in Jerusalem Barbara PL
user who told me more about the
situation in
hunis that military operation is
continuing the Israelis say they have
conducted more air strikes and they've
also destroyed uh weapons weapon stores
as well as tunnels they're going after
Hamas militants they say in the Eastern
districts of kanun now they thought they
had cleared this area earlier in the
year there was a sweeping operation in
the city of kanun and then they pulled
out in April but then they they said
that there had been increased rocket
fire from this particular area that
Hamas was regroup grouping so they'
moved in again but those evacuation
orders were then given to the people
living there so around 400,000 people
were living in this area many of them
having been displaced uh previously and
as you mentioned this was a part of this
area was had been designated uh a
humanitarian zone so yesterday we had
people fleeing with very little notice
uh just picking up what they could carry
and some of them running out uh but not
fast enough because uh you you were
saying that the casualty figures there
many were killed and in injured and now
looking for another place to stay um
they can go to the other designated
humanitarian Zone but that is quite
crowded with other people there aren't
that many services uh and as a un
official said uh the the the front line
keeps suffocating them it keeps moving
and people are constantly asking where
can we go now where can we go now um
there's no place safe so the this has
been again another Mass displacement in
Gaza and Barbara let's talk about benj
in netanyahu's trip to Washington as he
was leaving Israel there were protests
weren't there people saying he should be
staying and and working on a deal to
free Israeli hostages but he is in
Washington uh what are people saying
there about their expectations for this
meeting with President Biden and of
course he's going to be meeting kamla
Harris as
well well he's going he's gone to
Washington at a time of great political
turbulence hasn't he because uh Mr Biden
has said he will drop out of the
presidential race so Kamala Harris is
possibly probably going to replace him
as a candidate so Mr Netanyahu is
meeting with Mr Biden as well as Kamala
Harrison he's also apparently asked for
a meeting with the former president
Trump so trying to figure out what the
political landscape in Washington is
like but he is under great pressure to
agree to a ceasefire deal in order to um
bring a pause in the fighting and also
to release Israeli hostages that
pressure comes from the Biden
Administration for sure uh from the
Democrat from elements in the Democrat
party as well and from the families of
the hostages he met them in Washington
but before he left they were protesting
regularly telling him you've got to sign
this deal uh don't go to Washington
before you do so that that pressure has
accompanied him to Washington but it
started here in Israel Barbara PL user
well as you've been hearing the World
Health Organization is warning that it
is extremely worried about a possible
polio outbreak in Gaza its Regional head
says many people are living in shelters
with just one toilet for 600 people and
little access to Safe Drinking Water
let's speak now to Samir sah who is
director of programs at Medical Aid for
Palestinians Samir thank you very much
for joining us on BBC News you obviously
must share those concerns expressed by
the World Health Organization traces of
polio have been found in the sewers in
Gaza um but the last case was in 1984 I
believe How likely is it that you were
going to see an outbreak do you
think thank you for inviting me as you
rightly stated last case was 1984 and uh
it was 23rd of June they took seven
samples from a sewage site in Gaza and
they found that six of them were
actually positive for what you call
vaccine derived polio virus now this
vaccine derived polio virus comes from a
strain which is from the weakend live
virus which is given an oral polio crops
it is of massive concern because uh this
is a population that is under continuous
bombardment have been displaced multiple
times and there are children who haven't
been vaccinated for polio so if this
strain gets into children who haven't
been vaccinated or who have a weakened
immune system they will get polio which
leads to paralysis of the lyms how
contagious is
polio it's very contagious it it's
basically a feal oral transmission Route
so which means that it's from the waste
in the sewage and in the uh gutters
outside and at the moment because
there's no waste disposal happening it's
very likely that it's going to
spread given that medical facilities in
Gaza are overwhelmed as as we've heard
uh what approach are you going to try to
to be working on to to deal with the
situation if people have not had young
children especially haven't had vaccin
inations or have only perhaps gotten
partway through the course of
vaccinations I mean the only thing that
we can do at the moment is make sure
that children receive vaccination but
actually the solution is not just
vaccination the solution is that there
should be a ceasefire now the solution
is that there should be an increase in
the aid going into Gaza especially
access to clean drinking water and
access to medical supplies and Medical
Teams going in to give you an idea there
were 11,000 trucks going in every month
uh before the crisis started for the
month of June compared to 11,000 only
581 trucks went into Gaza so actually
not much Aid is going and then ceasefire
is also important because the repair of
the sewage system the repair of the
water supply system is important you
have to clean up tons of waste that is
on the streets of Gaza and you have to
rebuild roads you have to provide the
transport system so people can get into
medical facilities in fact the bombings
have to stop so that people can access
medical care and just finally briefly
Samir without a ceasefire currently
obviously to what extent can your teams
um mitigate the outbreak of of a disease
like
this it's extremely difficult it's
extremely difficult because uh if you
know there's zero electricity in Gaza at
the
moment vaccines need a cold chain which
means they need to be kept refrigerated
so even if you deliver a lot of vaccines
then there's a big challenge of keeping
them
refrigerated uh in fact even fuel is in
short supply inside
Gaza and so yeah our our response uh is
quite challenging it's very difficult to
provide the vaccines uh even with the
teams and even if you are providing the
vaccines you are not taking care of the
live virus that is in the seage system
already so you have to tackle that as
well Samir sa thank you very much
director of programs at Medical Aid for
pales
Ians and let's return now to the
political situation in the Middle East
and uh China says 14 Palestinian
factions have agreed to set up an
interim National reconciliation
government to govern Gaza after the war
ends it follows talks in Beijing between
representatives from each group
including Hamas and fata which is in
charge of the occupied West Bank the
Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi who
attended the discussions hailed what he
called The Beijing declaration Let's uh
talk about this some more now with the
founder of China dialogue trust Isabelle
Hilton Isabelle thank you very much uh
for joining us many previous efforts to
uh to try to deal with antagonism
between Hamas and fata and various other
groups have have failed um how much
weight do you put behind this effort and
this
declaration well it it's quite a big
declaration uh it's significant in that
China doesn't usually you know take
risks like this um so China does have
quite a lot of heft um as you say a lot
of previous attempts have failed
including attempts broken by Egypt and
many other intermediaries and we have
nearly 20 years of hostility now between
these two factions but we are in an
extreme situation we've got the
continuing War and the devastation of
Gaza conflict on the West Bank and the
United States which is m in its own
electoral politics and therefore can be
you know has limited has limited effect
and and the
frustration that President Biden has
been unable apparently to restrain
Benjamin Netanyahu which is you know
causing waves in the region so for China
this is a big opportunity and and it's
one that they have steadily been uh
taking advantage of the talks began very
early in the year in Moscow and then
moved to Beijing in April in May China
hosted big uh Arab conference as part of
its uh now continuing diplomacy with the
Arab world in which China posited the
need for an International Peace
conference and now this so there's been
a lot of setting up of context here so
why I is China uh positioning itself
like this trying to broker some kind of
deal and and to what extent do you think
those involved in the talks in
Washington Joe Biden CA Harris Benjamin
Netanyahu to extent do you think they
will be paying attention to what's been
happening in Beijing well I think they
will be paying attention there is a
fundamental uh difference in approach in
that the United States insists that
Hamas must recognize the right of Israel
to exist and there has been nothing in
any Chinese statement to that effect so
we have you know essentially a very
different approach but the fact that
China's weight in the region has been
growing so much it has good relations
with Iran it has good relations with
Saudi Arabia it's one of the biggest
customers for Middle East energy it's a
supplier of renewable energy so
altogether China's uh position in the
gulf and and in what it caus West Asia
is actually getting very strong and the
United States is beginning to look as
though it can't quite you know
manipulate things as it as it used to it
can't quite bring a result as it used to
so for China this is a big win in terms
of its Global image just very briefly
Isabelle because we're almost out of
time interesting also that Ukraine's
foreign minister dimitro kba uh is in
China at the invite the behest of the
the Chinese they sent the invitation um
what might be happening there well I you
there has been it's interesting because
there's been very little contact between
China and Ukraine and I think China is
trying to trying to correct the global
impression of facilitating and
supporting Russia in its aggressive war
against Ukraine I think that is doing
diplomatic damage China again is trying
to present itself as a peacemaker It
produced a 12-point plan last year with
no diplomatic underpinning but it
continues to maintain a a posture if you
like of wanting peace okay Isabelle
Hilton founder of China dialogue trust
thank you very much thank you